1.3 Learning through Play

# Learning through Play

Sonic Pi encourages you to learn about both computing and music through
play and experimentation. The most important thing is that you're having
fun, and before you know it you'll have accidentally learned how to
code, compose and perform.

## There are no mistakes

Whilst we're on this subject, let me just give you one piece of advice
I've learned over my years of live coding with music - *there are no
mistakes, only opportunities*. This is something I've often heard in
relation to jazz but it works equally well with live coding. No matter
how experienced you are - from a complete beginner to a seasoned
live coder, you'll run some code that has a completely unexpected
outcome. It might sound insanely cool - in which case run with
it. However, it might sound totally jarring and out of place. It doesn't
matter that it happened - what matters is what you do next with it. Take
the sound, manipulate it and morph it into something awesome. The crowd
will go *wild*.

## Start Simple

When you're learning, it's tempting to want to do amazing things
*now*. However, just hold that thought and see it as a distant goal to
reach *later*. For now, instead think of the *simplest* thing you could
write which would be fun and rewarding that's a small step towards the
amazing thing you have in your head. Once you have an idea about that
simple step, then try and build it, play with it and then see what new
ideas it gives you. Before long you'll be too busy having fun and making
real progress. 

Just make sure to share your work with others!
