1.1 Live Coding

# Live Coding

One of the most exciting aspects of Sonic Pi is that it enables you to
write and *modify code live* to make music, just like you might perform
live with a guitar. This means that given some practice you can take
Sonic Pi on stage and gig with it.

## Free your mind

Before we get into the real details of how Sonic Pi works in this
tutorial, I'd like to give you an experience of what it's like to live
code. Don't worry if you don't understand much (or any) of this. Just
try to hold onto your seats and enjoy...

## A live loop

Let's get started, copy the folling code into an empty workspace above:

```
live_loop :flibble do
  sample :bd_haus, rate: 1
  sleep 0.5
end
```

Now, press the `Run` button and you'll hear a nice fast bass drum
beating away. Now, whilst it's still running, change the sleep
value. Try something higher like `1`. Press the `Run` button again -
notice how the drum speed has changed. Also, *remember this moment*, this
is the first time you've live coded with Sonic Pi and it's unlikely to
be your last...

Let's add something else into the mix. Above `sample :bd_haus` add the
line `sample :ambi_choir, rate: 0.3`. Your code should look like this:


```
live_loop :flibble do
  sample :ambi_choir, rate: 0.3
  sample :bd_haus, rate: 1
  sleep 1
end
```

Now, play around. Change the rates - what happens when you use high
values, or small values? What happens if you choose a really small
`sleep` value? Can you make it go so fast your computer can't keep up?

Try commenting one of the `sample` lines out by adding a `#` to the
beginning:

```
live_loop :flibble do
  sample :ambi_choir, rate: 0.3
#  sample :bd_haus, rate: 1
  sleep 1
end

```

Notice how it tells the computer to ignore it, so we don't hear it. This
is called a comment. In Sonic Pi we can use comments to remove and add
things into the mix.

Finally, let me leave you something to play with. Take the code below,
and copy it into a spare workspace. Now, don't try to understand it too
much other than see that there are two loops - so two things going round
at the same time. Now, do what you do best - experiment and play
around. Here are some suggestions

* Try changing the blue `rate:` values to hear the sample sound change
* Try changing the `sleep` times and hear that both loops can spin round at
different rates. 
* Try uncommenting the two sample lines and enjoy the sound of the
guitar played backwards.
* Try changing any of the blue numbers


Remember to press `Run` and you'll hear the change next time the loop
goes round. If you end up in a pickle, don't worry - hit `Stop`, delete
the code in the workspace and paste a fresh copy in and you're ready to
jam again. Making mistakes is how you'll learn the quickest...


```
live_loop :guit do
  with_fx :flanger, mix: 1, depth: 5 do
    sample :guit_em9, rate: 0.5
  end
#  sample :guit_em9, rate: -0.5
#  sample :guit_em9, rate: -0.25
  sleep 8
end

live_loop :boom do
  with_fx :reverb, room: 0.9 do
    sample :bd_boom, amp: 10, rate: 1
  end
  sleep 8
end
```

