6 FX

# Studio FX

One of the most rewarding and fun aspects of Sonic Pi is the ability to
easily add studio effects to your sounds. For example, you may wish to
add some reverb to parts of your piece, or some echo or perhaps even
distort or wobble your basslines.

Sonic Pi provides a very simple yet powerful way of adding FX. It even
allows you to chain them (so you can pass your sounds through
distortion, then echo and then reverb) and also control each individual
FX unit with opts (in a similar way to giving params to synths and
samples). You can even modify the opts of the FX whilst it's still
running. So, for example, you could increase the reverb on your bass
throughout the track...

## Guitar Pedals

If all of this sounds a bit complicated, don't worry. Once you play
around with it a little, it will all become quite clear. Before you do
though, a simple analogy is that of guitar FX pedals. There are many
kinds of FX pedals you can buy. Some add reverb, others distort etc. A
guitarist will plug his or her guitar into one FX pedal -
i.e. distortion -, then take another cable and connect (chain) a
reverb pedal. The output of the reverb pedal can then be plugged into
the amplifier:

```
Guitar -> Distortion -> Reverb -> Amplifier
```

This is called FX chaining. Sonic Pi supports exactly
this. Additionally, each pedal often has dials and sliders to allow
you to control how much distortion, reverb, echo etc. to apply. Sonic
Pi also supports this kind of control. Finally, you can imagine a
guitarist playing whilst someone plays with the FX controls whilst
they're playing. Sonic Pi also supports this - but instead of needing
someone else to control things for you, that's where the computer
steps in.

Let's explore FX!
