10.2 Shortcut Cheatsheet

# Shortcut Cheatsheet

The following is a summary of the main shortcuts available within Sonic
Pi. Please see Section 10.1 for motivation and background.

## Conventions

In this list, we use the following conventions (where *Meta* is one of *Alt* on
Windows/Linux or *Cmd* on Mac):

* `C-a` means hold the *Control* key then press the *a* key whilst holding them both at the same time, then releasing.
* `M-r` means hold the *Meta* key and then press the *r* key whilst holding them both at the same time, then releasing.
* `S-M-z` means hold the *Shift* key, then the *Meta* key, then finally the *z* key all at the same time, then releasing.
* `C-M-f` means hold the *Control* key, then press *Meta* key, finally the *f* key all at the same time, then releasing.


## Main Application Manipulation

* `M-r` - Run code
* `M-s` - Stop code
* `M-i` - Toggle Help System
* `M-p` - Toggle Preferences
* `M-<` - Switch workspace to the left
* `M->` - Switch workspace to the right
* `M-+` - Increase text size of current workspace
* `M--` - Decrease text size of current workspace


## Selection/Copy/Paste

* `M-a`     - Select all
* `M-c`     - Copy selection to paste buffer
* `M-]`     - Copy selection to paste buffer
* `M-x`     - Cut selection to paste buffer
* `C-]`     - Cut selection to paste buffer
* `C-k`     - Cut to the end of the line
* `M-v`     - Paste from paste buffer to editor
* `C-y`     - Paste from paste buffer to editor
* `C-SPACE` - Set mark. Navigation will now manipulate highlighted region. Use `C-g` to escape.


## Editor Manipulation

* `M-m`   - Align all text
* `Tab`   - Align current line/selection (or complete list)
* `C-l`   - Center editor
* `C-M-n` - Move line or selection down
* `C-M-p` - Move line or selection up
* `S-M-u` - Move up 10 lines
* `S-M-d` - Move down 10 lines
* `C-t`   - transpose/swap characters

## Navigation

* `C-a` - Move to beginning of line
* `C-e` - Move to end of line
* `C-p` - Move to previous line
* `C-n` - Move to next line
* `C-f` - Move forward one character
* `C-b` - Move backward one character
* `M-f` - Move forward one word
* `M-b` - Move backward one word


## Deletion

* `C-h` - Delete previous character
* `C-d` - Delete next character


## Advanced Editor Features

* `C-i` - Show docs for word under cursor
* `M-z` - Undo
* `M-Z` - Redo
* `C-g` - Escape
