2.1 Your First Beeps

# Os teus primeiros Beeps

Dá uma olhadela no código que se segue:

```
play 70
```

É aqui que tudo começa. Copia e cola-o no editor (o espaço em branco por baixo do botão *Run*). Agora carrega em *Run*...

## Beep!

Intenso. Carrega outra vez. E outra vez. *E outra vez...*



```
play 75
```

Can you hear the difference? Try a lower number:

```
play 60

```

So, lower numbers make lower pitched beeps and higher numbers make
higher pitched beeps. Just like on a piano, the keys at the lower part
of the piano (the left hand side) play lower notes and the keys on the
higher part of the piano (the right hand side) play higher notes. In
fact, the numbers actually relate to notes on the piano. `play 47`
actually means play the 47th note on the piano. Which means that `play 48`
is one note up (the next note to the right). It just so happens that
the 4th octave C is number 60. Go ahead and play it: `play 60`.

*Don't worry* if this means nothing to you - it didn't to me when I
 first started. All that matters right now is that you know that *low
 numbers make lower beeps* and *high numbers make higher beeps*.

## Chords (Acordes)

Playing a note is quite fun, but playing many at the same time can be
even better. Try it:

```
play 72
play 75
play 79
```

Jazzy! So, when you write multiple `play`s, they all play at the same
time. Try it for yourself - which numbers sound good together? Which
sound terrible? Experiment, explore and find out for yourself.

## Melodia

So, playing notes and chords is fun - but how about a melody? What if
you wanted to play one note after another and not at the same time?
Well, that's easy, you just need to `sleep` between the notes:

```
play 72
sleep 1
play 75
sleep 1
play 79
```

How lovely, a little arpeggio. So what does the `1` mean in `sleep 1`?
Well it means the *duration of the sleep*. It actually means sleep for
one beat, but for now we can think about it as sleeping for 1
second. So, what if we wanted to make our arpeggio a little faster?
Well, we need to use shorter sleep values. What about a half i.e. `0.5`:

```
play 72
sleep 0.5
play 75
sleep 0.5
play 79
```

Notice how it plays faster. Now, try for yourself, change the times -
use different times and notes.

One thing to try is in-between notes such as `play 52.3` and `play 52.63`.
There's absolutely no need to stick to standard whole notes. Play
around and have fun.


## Nomes tradicionais das Notas

For those of you that already know some musical notation (don't worry if
you don't - you don't need it to have fun) you might want to write a
melody using note names such as C and F# rather than numbers. Sonic Pi
has you covered. You can do the following:

```
play :C
sleep 0.5
play :D
sleep 0.5
play :E
```

Remember to put the colon `:` in front of your note name so that it
goes pink. Also, you can specify the octave by adding a number after
the note name:

```
play :C3
sleep 0.5
play :D3
sleep 0.5
play :E4
```

If you want to make a note sharp, add an `s` after the note name such as
`play :Fs3` and if you want to make a note flat, add a `b` such as `play :Eb3`.

Now go *crazy* and have fun making your own tunes.
